# dplogs : behind the scenes

## Why log ?
As I embark into Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, I want to document my experience to share it with the community, drive discussions and receive feedback.

## Why not WordPress or Blogger ?
It's all about learning, so why not brush-up a little on front-end web development skills. That'll also let me customize. I have used Blogger in the past and also written a Silverlight web application that was hosted on my school's servers.

## Why React, not Angular ?
At first, I started looking into creating the MEAN stack and learning Angular 2. Each layer of the MEAN stack was created as a Docker image and deployed on Kubernetes. Then there were a few days when work got a little crazy. When I got back to it, Angular 4 was released. Though I hadn't done much with Angular 2, reading the new documentation felt as if I was starting all over with Angular 4. Meanwhile React had started to gain popularity and felt shiny new. The MEAN stack also started to feel as an overkill for just a blog, I'd have had to run it in a cloud infrastructure which could have cost me. I soon realized that similar to serving a Silverlight web application, I could host a static website serving the React app saving the hassle of maintaning the infrastructure. I figured, if I want to learn something new anyway, then why not pick the latest and greatest. After going through the concepts in the documentation and following few tutorials, I got a hang of React and it's been great !


## The Stack
- Azure Application Insights (telemetry)
- Git (source control)
- Github (source control service)
- Github Pages (hosting)
- React (framework)
- Ubuntu (development OS)
- Visual Studio Code (IDE)
- Visual Studio Team Services (work item tracking)
